---
published: false
---

## Cryptonomicon
### A short overview of Hellabytes, Exawatts & other assorted Arcana.



### 3G/4G/LTE/Wimax/Wireless Broadband
Alternatives to ADSL for broadband Internet, which rely on a network of towers to provide signal instead of cables to your premises. Cost more than ADSL, and are subject to quality problems depending on number of users online or even the weather.
3G is the 3rd generation of cellular technology and offers broadband data access. 3G is broader than just one network technology, so it includes different services which are not compatible with each other. Technically Neotel’s wireless options are 3G, but not compatible with GSM cellular networks.
3.5G is an evolution of 3G technology which offers higher speeds.
4G is the next generation of cell technology, which will offer “always on” data and even faster speeds.
LTE (Long Term Evolution) is a 4G standard, providing high speed mobile broadband. LTE-A (LTE Advanced) is a further speed increase for LTE.
Wimax is similar in concept to cell networks but is a data only service without a voice component.

### Admin
Either a person with special privileges on a website or server, or the tool they can use to make their changes.
A System Administrator is a person who has privileges to maintain a server, to upload code, maintain and modify databases, to install new software and also the ability to accidently irretrievably delete everything. See BOFH
An Admin interface is a web interface to a system - e.g. to a CMS - where users can modify content or settings. If they have sufficient privileges they can create or modify other user accounts.

### ADSL
Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line - an internet connection over a phone line, which downloads faster than it can upload. More reliable than wireless connections like 3G, LTE, iBurst, Neotel, Wimax.

### AJAX
Asynchronous Javascript And XML - a technique for changing content on a web page without refreshing the whole page. Also includes fancy effects like photo galleries.

### API
An application programming interface (API) is an interface implemented by a software program which enables it to interact with other software. Just as a user interface lets a person interact with a machine or software, and defines what they can or can’t do, an API is a machine-to-machine interface.

### API Examples:
The iPhone software has APIs to use certain features. You can write an iPhone app which uses these features, and the API is the specification of how to use them - e.g. to get the position from the GPS.
When we use a service like Google Maps, there is an API to allow a website to integrate it and show places on it.
An iPhone app that displays content from a website might use an API on that website to get the content, instead of simply displaying it directly from the website.
Google Analytics has an API to get the website data into it.
If we want to have registered users on a website added to an external system like the Pmailer direct mail system, we need to use an API of Pmailer to write the code to put the data into their database.
When we integrate a mobi site with a consumer’s existing back end system so that people can log onto the mobi site with their web site username and password, then we need an API for our mobi site code to talk to their web site back end.

### Bandwidth
How much data can be transferred over a connection in a given time. Imagine the Internet as a series of tubes or pipes - bandwidth is how wide the pipes are.

### Backend
The invisible functionality of a system - typically involving a database. Usually includes ways to manage content on the site, see CMS. Also typically includes mechanism for users to register a profile. Compare with Front end.

### Blog
Blog (abbreviation of the term web log) is a type of website or a component of a website. Originally the term was used to describe the masses of meandering, blatantly uninteresting online diaries, the term has matured to mean any site or component thereof that posts regular, multi-media rich entries in reverse chronological order. Verb: To blog - to create or write these posts.

### Blogosphere
All the blogs, as if they form a collection of knowledge, wit and wisdom distinct from traditional news media. The Blogosphere is seen as independent of the news media who may be swayed by money or politics, but also full of lolcats.

### BSD Licence
The BSD licence is an Open Source software licence which is more relaxed than the GPL. People can take BSD-licenced open source software and make a closed-source derivative of it - e.g. Microsoft Windows contains BSD-licenced code, but does not make Windows itself open source.

Jmbo and Vumi are licenced with a BSD licence, which enables people to produce commercial derivatives of it. The technologies that Jmbo and Vumi are built on, including Python and Django, are licenced under similar licences.

This allows clients to take over the code we build for them, and make their own modifications to it.

### Byte
The amount of storage space for one letter of the alphabet, e.g. the letter “A”.

### CDN - Content Delivery Network
A Content Delivery Network is a setup for caching images and content on multiple servers around the world, “closer” to the users than the site itself. So if there is a site hosted in the USA, and a CDN server in the UK, and a UK user goes to the site, they actually go to the CDN server without realising it, which shows them its copy of the content. When content is updated on the actual site server, the CDN in theory picks up the latest content and shows it.

### Cloud
A magical place full of computers that are unseen - hosted somewhere else. Cloud computing also includes special rocket science ways of making a system run on many computers at once to handle larger volumes of data or users. Gmail is “in the cloud” because it doesn’t run on a single server, but on many machines linked together in some remote location.

### Chat Speak
An abbreviated way of writing commonly used in instant messaging or SMS.
afaik - as far as I know
afk - away from keyboard
bbl - be back later
eom - end of message
brb - be right back
btw - by the way
cob / eob - close/end of business - end of the work day - usually in reference to a delivery deadline
ianal - I am not a lawyer (but... here’s my opinion)
iirc - if I remember correctly
imo - in my opinion
imho - in my humble opinion
irl - in real life
lol - laugh out loud
nrn - no reply necessary
+1 - I agree - like an upvote

For more see Urban Dictionary - A veritable cornucopia of streetwise lingo, posted and defined by its readers - is a great wiki reference.

### CMS
(Content Management System) This is a backend programme that allows for content to be stored in one central place and published to a number of different platforms (eg mobi, web, social media) at the click of a button. This is essential so that content can be updated frequently without having to do development each time, or without the content manager needing to have any development skills.

### CRM/RM/sCRM
From wikipedia:
Customer Relationship Management (or Relationship Management, social Customer Relationship Management) is a broadly recognized, widely-implemented strategy for managing and nurturing a company’s interactions with customers, clients and sales prospects. It involves using technology to organize, automate, and synchronize business processes—principally sales activities, but also those for marketing, customer service and technical support. The overall goals are to find, attract, and win new clients, nurture and retain those the company already has, entice former clients back into the fold, and reduce the costs of marketing and client service.
For more info.

### CTR (Click Through Rate)
is a way of measuring the success of an online advertising campaign. A CTR is obtained by dividing the "number of users who clicked on an ad" on a web page/ mobi page by the "number of times the ad was delivered" (impressions). For example, if a banner ad was delivered 100 times (impressions delivered) and one person clicked on it (clicks recorded), then the resulting CTR would be 1 percent. The industry standard for web CTRs is currently about 0.2 - 0.3 %. This is slightly higher on mobile banners and is currently about 0.8 - 1 %

### CPA (Cost per acquisition)
A payment model (sometimes called Pay per action) for buying online and mobi media in which you only pay for each acquisition eg each user who registers or visits your site. Generally media owners will not engage with this type of payment model because the amount of money they earn is related to the success of the campaign.

### CPC (Cost per click)
A payment model for buying online and mobi media in which you pay for each time a user clicks on your banner. There is a shift towards this type of model, away from the old school cost per impressions model, across the board. This type of purchasing model is an optimum balance between ensuring that the media owner gets paid and the media purchaser receives real value for their buy.

### CPM
(Cost per Mille/ Thousand) CPM describes the cost per 1000 views of an ad (web/mobi). These are not unique user views but rather page views and is a good way of measuring brand reach.

### CSS
From Wikipedia: 
Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) is a style sheet language used to describe the presentation semantics (the look and formatting) of a document written in a markup language. Its most common application is to style web pages written in HTML and XHTML. CSS is designed primarily to enable the separation of document content from document presentation, including elements such as the layout, colors, and fonts. This separation can improve content accessibility, provide more flexibility and control in the specification of presentation characteristics, enable multiple pages to share formatting, and reduce complexity and repetition in the structural content.
From more info go here.

### CSV
A Comma Separated Values file is a text file containing structured data from a database. The values are usually separated by commas, for example: “Gustav,Praekelt,gustav@praekelt.com” These files are used to move data between different databases or spreadsheets.

Aside from it being a text file that has commas (or some other punctuation) between the fields. 

### Dashboard
A dashboard in the Praekelt context is an online tool that tracks campaign or platform performance with time. More specifically it looks at the Key Performance Indicators and measures how close we are to reaching our campaign targets. Commonly tracked variables include:
SMS entries
Unique users on any platform
Unique code submissions on any platform
Page impressions on web or mobi
Downloads on web or mobi

### Database
From wikipedia: database
A database consists of an organized collection of data for one or more uses, typically in digital form. 
In a Praekelt context it most commonly refers to:
The database software powering our sites and systems - see CMS
A collection of consumer contact information data eg email addresses or mobile numbers. (e.g. “Where is the database from that campaign?”)

### Data Centre (DC)
A secure room full of computers mounted in racks, with air conditioning, uninterruptable power supplies (UPS) and generator backup power. Where websites are typically hosted at ISPs.

### Django
Django is some open source code which makes web development really fast, and is named after a legendary guitar player. We use Django.

From Wikipedia: 
Django is an open source web application framework, written in Python, which follows the model-view-controller architectural pattern. Django's primary goal is to ease the creation of complex, database-driven websites. Django emphasizes reusability and "pluggability" of components, rapid development, and the principle of DRY (Don't Repeat Yourself).
For more info go here.

### Domain Name, DNS
The Domain Name System (DNS) is a way of converting between human-readable addresses on the Internet (like www.praekelt.com) to machine-readable addresses, called IP addresses (like 41.203.18.26).

Domain names fall under Top Level Domains (TLDs) like .com, .net, .org, or Country Code TLDs like .co.za, .co.uk, etc. Domain names are bought through registrars who register them in global databases. There is an annual price.

Domain names controlled by Praekelt can be easily repointed from one server to another. Domain names controlled by clients usually take more time as we need to get their IT people (often in other countries) to do the changes.

### Facebook
From Wikipedia:
Facebook is a social networking website launched in February 2004 that is operated and privately owned by Facebook, Inc.,[1] with more than 500 million[5] active users in July 2010.[6][N 1] Users can add people as friends and send them messages, and update their personal profiles to notify friends about themselves. Additionally, users can join networks organized by workplace, school, or college. The website's name stems from the colloquial name of books given to students at the start of the academic year by university administrations in the US with the intention of helping students to get to know each other better. Facebook allows anyone who declares themselves to be aged 13 or older to become a member of the website.
For more go here or visit the site and get involved at http://www.facebook.com

### Facebook Connect
From Facebook Developer Docs:
Facebook Connect enables authentication of 3rd party applications to interact with the Graph API on behalf of Facebook users, and it provides a powerful single-sign on mechanism across Web, mobile, and desktop apps.
see: “Facebook Graph API”
For more info go here.

### Facebook Graph API
From Facebook Developer Docs:
The Facebook Graph API is the core of Facebook Platform, enabling you to read and write data to Facebook. It provides a simple and consistent view of the social graph, uniformly representing objects (like people, photos, events, and pages) and the connections between them (like friendships, likes, and photo tags).
For more info go here.

### FED
A Front End Developer. See Front end

### Flash
From Wikipedia:
Adobe Flash is a multimedia platform used to add animation, video, and interactivity to Web pages. Flash is frequently used for advertisements and games. More recently, it has been positioned as a tool for "Rich Internet Applications" ("RIAs").
For more info go here.
We don’t particularly like flash. There’s usually a better, more elegant way to do multimedia or interactivity than flash.

### Foursquare
A mobile location based social network in which users "check in" to venues, businesses, and restaurants. Users can then see where their friends are as well as what locations are "trending" (heavily attended at the moment). Users win badges for regular check-ins in specific locations - adding a gaming element to the application.

### Free Software
Free carries the dual meanings of zero cost, and freedom from restriction. “Free Software” refers to the latter - software that (while usually zero cost anyway) comes with certain freedoms for the user:
The freedom to run the program, for any purpose (freedom 0).
The freedom to study how the program works, and change it to make it do what you wish (freedom 1). Access to the source code is a precondition for this.
The freedom to redistribute copies so you can help your neighbor (freedom 2).
The freedom to distribute copies of your modified versions to others (freedom 3). By doing this you can give the whole community a chance to benefit from your changes. Access to the source code is a precondition for this.
Free Software is therefore related to Open Source software, but Open Source does not necessarily guarantee the same freedoms. Free Software is typically licenced under the GPL (General Public Licence). For more information see http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.html

### Front end
The visible bits of a website - the graphics and HTML (and CSS and Javascript). Done by a FED (Front end developer). Used to be simple, now complicated by various frameworks that have more and more jargon. SASS, LESS, Bootstrap, jQuery, Angular, Progressive Enhancement... See also back end.

### FTP
File Transfer Protocol. 1980s technology for moving large files around. Still in use.

### GIF
The Graphics Interchange Format (GIF) is a bitmap image format that was introduced by CompuServe in 1987 and has since come into widespread usage on the World Wide Web due to its wide support and portability. Gifs also allow for animation in a web browser. For examples of these go here
 
### Gmail
Google’s web email, revolutionary in its time for having powerful searching abilities, archiving read mail instead of putting it in folders, and providing enough space to never have to delete email.

### Google Chat (gchat)
Google Chat is an Instant Messaging system. Lets you chat in real time by typing messages (or voice/video if both ends have the right bits and pieces). Integrated with Gmail so you can search your gmail for past chat records, e.g. search for “is:chat” and the person’s name.

### GPL
The Free Software Foundation’s General Public Licence, applying to Free Software. Software under this licence is related to Open Source, but requires that anyone modifying it release their source code modifications. This means that any derivative work of a GPL program is also required to be GPL. See http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/gpl.html. See BSD licence for an alternative.

### Handset detection
Detecting which mobile phone you have, because they are all different, with different screen sizes and capabilities which makes mobi site development a challenge.

### Handset Lists
Lists of handsets which we will support for a given mobi site. We can either support a top 10 handset list only for low budget sites, or a more comprehensive list of handsets. To be negotiated with the client at Scope of Work stage.

### Hosting
Web sites are hosted on servers in a data centre at an ISP. The server capacity required depends on the expected traffic levels of the site. Higher capacity hosting (more powerful servers, and more traffic/bandwidth) costs more.

Praekelt Hosting (the SRE team) operates hosting servers primarily with Hetzner in South Africa, in data centres in Cape Town and Johannesburg, and allocate capacity through virtual servers according to project requirements.

### HTML
From Wikipedia:
HTML, which stands for HyperText Markup Language, is the predominant markup language for web pages. It provides a means to create structured documents by denoting structural semantics for text such as headings, paragraphs, lists, links, quotes and other items. It allows images and objects to be embedded and can be used to create interactive forms.

HTML5 is currently under development as the next major revision of the HTML standard. Like its immediate predecessors, HTML 4.01 and XHTML 1.1, HTML5 is a standard for structuring and presenting content on the World Wide Web. The new standard incorporates features like video playback and drag-and-drop that have been previously dependent on third-party browser plug-ins such as Adobe Flash, Microsoft Silverlight, and Google Gears.
XHTML (Extensible Hypertext Markup Language) is a family of XML markup languages that mirror or extend versions of the widely used Hypertext Markup Language (HTML), the language in which web pages are written. While HTML (prior to HTML5) was defined as an application of Standard Generalized Markup Language (SGML), a very flexible markup language framework, XHTML is an application of XML, a more restrictive subset of SGML. 

XHTML Mobile Profile (XHTML MP) is a hypertextual computer language standard designed specifically for mobile phones and other resource-constrained devices.
For more info go here.

### HTML for Dummies
Web pages are written in HTML which specifies the formatting and structure of the page to the browser. CSS refers to style sheets to make the formatting consistent across all the pages of a site. XHTML is like HTML, but for mobile phone browsers. HTML5 is a revision of HTML with new features like video playback, which make sites for modern devices and browsers slicker than using flash.

### HTTP
Hypertext Transfer Protocol. Invented by Sir Tim Berners-Lee invented and is commonly called the World Wide Web (WWW) or just the Web. HTTP is how a browser can fetch a web page from a server, including the images and rich media, and how each page (and image, etc) has its own address. HTTP is signified by the “http://” in a URL.

### HTTPS
HTTP (Secure) is HTTP that has been encrypted - see SSL. HTTPS is signified by a URL starting with “https://” and usually shown visually by the browser with a padlock or other icon showing a secure connection.

### IA(Information Architecture)

### Instant Messaging (IM)
Instant messaging is a real-time (thus instant) direct text-based communication (thus messaging) between two or more people using computers or mobile phones through a shared software application such as gchat or Mxit. 
For more.

### Interpipe
What you use to publish Lolcats. see: “The Internet”  

### Internet
From wikipedia: 
The Internet is a global system of interconnected computer networks that use the standard Internet Protocol Suite (TCP/IP) to serve billions of users worldwide. 
For more info go here.

### IP - Intellectual Property
The legal issue of who owns relatively intangible things like knowledge, content, names and programming code.
From wikipedia:
Intellectual property (IP) is a term referring to a number of distinct types of creations of the mind for which property rights are recognised--and the corresponding fields of law. Under intellectual property law, owners are granted certain exclusive rights to a variety of intangible assets, such as musical, literary, and artistic works; discoveries and inventions; and words, phrases, symbols, and designs. Common types of intellectual property include copyrights, trademarks, patents, industrial design rights and trade secrets in some jurisdictions.
For more info go here.

### IP - Internet Protocol
On the Internet, every machine and piece of equipment has a numeric address with four components, like 192.168.123.201 - this is an IP address. Data gets routed between these addresses, so any given machine “in the middle of the cloud” knows where to send it on so that it ultimately gets to its destination. Domain Names are a way of giving human-friendly names to these IP addresses, so that we can type www.facebook.com and get to the right server automatically.

### JavaScript
Javascript, abbreviated JS, is a programming language for (usually) small bits of functionality on a web page that get manipulated directly in your browser, instead of on the web server. Javascript normally powers things that can get updated in a web page without you having to reload the web page - anything from displaying new email, to animations, to making photo galleries using AJAX - Javascript makes the web browsing experience “smoother”.

### JPEG
Image file format, best suited for photographs. The file is compressed to take up less disk space.

### jQuery
jQuery is a fast and concise JavaScript Library that simplifies HTML document traversing, event handling, animating, and Ajax interactions for rapid web development. jQuery is designed to change the way that you write JavaScript.

### Kilo(overview of SI prefixes)
Kilo = 1000.

An SMS contains 160 bytes. The text in this document or a typical email can be measured in KB - A Kilobyte is 1000 bytes. The size of a document with many images, or a video, can be measured in MB - a Megabyte is 1000 Kilobites. The size of your hard drive can be measured in GB - a Gigabyte is 1000 Megabytes. Servers can have lots of storage space measured in TB - a Terabyte is 1000 Gigabytes, 1000000 Megabytes, 1,000,000,000 Kilobytes or 1,000,000,000,000 bytes.

### KPI
(Key Performance Indicators) At the beginning of any project, the strategy team should indicate which metrics are Key Performance indicators. These are the most important statistics in a project and if these KPI’s reach their targets, the campaign will be considered a success. These vary greatly depending on the objectives of a project but an example of some fairly standard KPI’s are:
Unique Users
Page Impressions
Site Stickiness
No of Entries
No of Registrations

### KBB (Key brand benefit)
Obscure marketing term referring to the intangible brand essence that attracts consumers to your brand over any other.

### LAMP
Linux, Apache, MySQL, PHP or Perl or Python. The LAMP stack is a set of software used to host websites, and is distinct from Microsoft’s .NET or SUN/Oracle’s Java. Although LAMP is sometimes used strictly to refer only to that combination, there are alternatives to each of the components: Praekelt hosts on a modified version of LAMP, typically Linux, Nginx, PostgreSQL and Python.

### Linux
Open Source (Free Software) operating system originally developed, and still managed, by Linus Torvalds. Forms part of a complete operating system environment which typically includes many applications which are an alternative to Microsoft or Apple software. Linux is usually available as a distribution from an organisation or vendor who puts all the components together like Apache web server, OpenOffice.org office software, Firefox web browser etc. Distributions include Ubuntu, Debian, Red Hat, CentOS, Gentoo

### LSM
From: SAARF
The SAARF LSM (Living Standards Measure) has become the most widely used marketing research tool in Southern Africa. It divides the population into 10 LSM groups, 10 (highest) to 1 (lowest). Previously eight groups were used but this changed in 2001 when the new SAARF Universal LSM consisting of 10 groups was introduced.
The SAARF LSM is a unique means of segmenting the South African market. It cuts across race and other outmoded techniques of categorising people, and instead groups people according to their living standards using criteria such as degree of urbanisation and ownership of cars and major appliances.
For more info go here

### Load Balancing
Running a system across multiple servers, and directing traffic across all of them to have them all share the load when it would be too much for a single server.

### Load Testing
Testing the capacity of a website or other system by simulating lots of users.

### Location Based Services (LBS)
From wikipedia:
A location-based service (LBS) is an information and entertainment service, accessible with mobile devices through the mobile network and utilizing the ability to make use of the geographical position of the mobile device.
Forphp

### LOLcats
An internet meme created by the anonymous imageboard 4chan (lol rules 1&2) as Caturday in 2005 or earlier, which was recently stolen by www.icanhascheezburger.com and renamed lolcats.

### Microblogging
An ultra-short text only blog entry. Made popular by platforms such as Facebook (the status update) and twitter (the tweet) that restrict the amount of characters in each entry.

### Mobi
A website optimised for viewing on mobile phones. This includes designing the content for small screens and limited capabilities - simplifying the user experience. To reach the widest audience, the site has to be simplified to the lowest common denominator - only features supported by the widest selection of unsophisticated phones. This can be mitigated by having more than one design for the site, e.g. one design for older simpler phones with smaller screens, and one design for smartphones with more capabilities and larger screens. See handset detection which is then required to serve the appropriate design to the phones.

### Mobile TV
Live TV and prerecorded Video on Demand content available on mobile phones. Praekelt partners with DStv to provide DStv Mobile, available on Vodafone Live, MTN SA, Safaricom, Vodacom Tanzania, Zamtel and other networks.

### Mxit
A mobile instant messaging application that allows users to talk to your friends (named contacts) simultaneously (in chat rooms) or on an individual basis. Each message costs less than a cent, making it a cheap alternative to SMS. Over 16 million South Africans are currently registered on the service.

### MySQL
Open Source relational database, the M in LAMP. Now owned by Oracle.

### NetBiscuits
NetBiscuits is a mobi site engine that claims to be compatible with practically every phone with a browser. It dynamically figures out how to display the site content for that particular handset. The disadvantages are that it is very restrictive about how the page elements can be laid out, so advanced designs are not possible for NetBiscuits mobi sites. It works on the lowest common denominator, so while it does give compatibility for most low end phones, the site looks poor on both low and high end phones.

### On Device Portals
An On-Device Portal (ODP) is usually a branded mobile application which is downloaded to and/or installed on a handset. Seen as an alternative to WAP or the next development of WAP, ODPs usually deliver functionality such as offline portals for no-wait access to content, dramatically improving usability.

### Page Impression (PI)
The exact number of times a specific Web site has been accessed or viewed by a user. A page impression acts as a counter for Web pages, informing site owners how many times their sites were visited. Page impressions are also referred to as hits.

### PCA
A Post Campaign Analysis (PCA) - essentially Praekelt’s unnecessarily obscure way to describe the report created at the end of a campaign that includes key results, lessons learned and the way forward.

### PDF
A document format that cannot (easily) be edited.

### PHP
PHP is a widely used, general-purpose scripting language that was originally designed for web development to produce dynamic web pages. PHP is usually a very entry level language for dynamic web pages, and so it’s relatively easy for graphic designers and HTML developers to learn PHP for simple enhancements to static websites. However this means there are a lot of PHP developers who don’t have much of a programming background, and most PHP code is therefore not of high quality, whereas languages that require more programming knowledge usually result in better quality, more easily maintainable and more robust code.

PHP is the P in LAMP (well, the most common P - others include Python and Perl).
For more info go here.

### Programming Languages
Programming languages are ways of converting human-understandable instructions to machine instructions. They include processing numbers and data, logic (IF something AND something else THEN do this ELSE do that) and storing data in structured ways, in files or databases. Examples of programming languages include C, Java, Visual Basic, Python, Ruby, PHP. Praekelt prefers Python.

### Proxy
From Wikipedia:
In computer networks, a proxy server is a server (a computer system or an application program) that acts as an intermediary for requests from clients seeking resources from other servers. A client connects to the proxy server, requesting some service, such as a file, connection, web page, or other resource, available from a different server. The proxy server evaluates the request according to its filtering rules. For example, it may filter traffic by IP address or protocol. If the request is validated by the filter, the proxy provides the resource by connecting to the relevant server and requesting the service on behalf of the client. A proxy server may optionally alter the client's request or the server's response, and sometimes it may serve the request without contacting the specified server. In this case, it 'caches' responses from the remote server, and returns subsequent requests for the same content directly.

### Python
Named after Monty Python, the Python programming language is an open source project, led by its creator Guido van Rossum, known as the BDFL (Benevolent Dictator For Life) of the project. Guido now works at Google, and Python is one of Google’s languages for internal development. 

Python is a general-purpose high-level programming language whose design philosophy emphasizes code readability. Python aims to combine "remarkable power with very clear syntax", and its standard library is large and comprehensive, meaning it comes with a lot of functionality included with Python code that can be reused. Python is Praekelt’s favourite development language.
For more info go here.

### PNG
Pronounced “ping”. A file format for images that can have a transparent background. Similar to GIF, an older format. Some say PNG stands for “PNG’s Not GIF.” JPG is better for photos, and PNG is better for logos and images with precise colour requirements.

### Production
Confusingly, refers both to the creation of a site and its operational status.
Production can mean the process of creating a site, including wireframing, design, coding and project management.
It can also refer to a Production Server, the live instance of a website or system - as opposed to a Staging server.
Therefore we want to fix all problems with a site while it is in production, before it is deployed on production...

### PSD
Photoshop file format for graphics/images. Often used by design vendors to produce a website design as an image.

### QA
Quality Assurance - a fancy name for testing a system to find the inevitable bugs. Includes:
Compatibility testing - testing different browsers and mobile handsets to make sure the site works on a range of them
Functional testing - testing the functionality of the site or system beyond how it looks
Load testing - testing that the hosting and coding will handle the expected traffic level
UAT / User Acceptance Testing - testing that the site does what the client wants

### Resolution
From wikipedia:
The display resolution of a digital television or display device is the number of distinct pixels in each dimension that can be displayed. Note that the use of the word resolution here is a misnomer, though common. The term “display resolution” is usually used to mean pixel dimensions, the number of pixels in each dimension (e.g., 1920×1200), which does not tell anything about the resolution of the display on which the image is actually formed: resolution properly refers to the pixel density, the number of pixels per unit distance or area, not total number of pixels.

### RSS
From wikipedia:
RSS (most commonly expanded as Really Simple Syndication) is a family of web feed formats used to publish frequently updated works—such as blog entries, news headlines, audio, and video—in a standardized format.

### Reputation Management
Reputation Management (RM) is the process of tracking the effect of brand’s actions, activities, campaigns and advertising on the opinions of consumers. The management loop includes reporting on those actions and opinions; and reacting to the resulting consumer feedback.

### SEO
Search Engine Optimisation is the black art of improving search rankings to present your site above others on search engine results.

### Server
A computer, or software, which provides a service. Typically refers to a physical powerful computer optimised to run 24x7 in a data centre. A server may run multiple services, for example email (SMTP), web (HTTP), file transfer (FTP). Shared servers run multiple sites for different customers all on the same system. Dedicated servers cost more, but are not shared. Virtual servers are a partitioning for a dedicated server, into what looks like multiple servers, all separately managed, so that different clients’ sites or systems can be managed independently.

### Shortcode
Example: 32323
From: Wikipedia
Short codes (also known as short numbers) are special telephone numbers, significantly shorter than full telephone numbers, that can be used to address SMS and MMS messages from mobile phones or fixed phones. There are two types of short codes: dialing and messaging.
Short codes are designed to be easier to read and remember than normal telephone numbers. Like telephone numbers, short codes are unique to each operator at the technological level. Even so, providers generally have agreements to avoid overlaps. In some countries, such as the United States, some classes of numbers are inter-operator (U.S. inter-operator numbers are called Common Short Codes).[1]
Short codes are widely used for value-added services such as television voting, ordering ringtones, charity donations and mobile services. Messages sent to short code can be billed at a higher rate than a standard SMS and may even subscribe a customer to a reoccurring monthly service that will be added to their mobile phone bill until they text e.g. the word "STOP" to terminate the service.

### Site stickiness
Site stickiness is a way of measuring how engaging and relevant the content within a site (mobi/web) is and is a much better way to measure engagement than average time spent on a site which is affected heavily by connection speed and other unmeasurable factors. Site stickiness is measured as Page Impressions/Session. A good average stickiness is 3.5 PI/session but we should always aim higher than this.

### SMPP
A protocol for transmitting SMS and USSD messages, used internally by the mobile networks, and can be used to integrate our systems with them, to receive mobile originated (MO) messages sent from mobile phones, and send mobile terminated (MT) messages to mobile phones.

### SMTP
The protocol for sending email. An SMTP server is a server which can receive email and deliver it on.

### SMS(incl. MO/MT, Premium)
Short Message Service - a text message on the GSM cellphone networks. Limited to 160 characters, but may be sent as multiple messages to show as one message on the recipient’s phone. Messages sent from a phone to a server are MO (mobile originated) and messages from a server to a phone are MT (mobile terminated). Premium SMSs to a shortcode cost extra to the consumer, and the extra revenue is split between the service provider and the owner of the shortcode.

### SoW - Scope of Work, or Statement of Work
A Scope or statement of work (SOW) is a formal document that captures and defines the work activities, deliverables and timeline a vendor will execute against in performance of specified work for a client. Detailed requirements and pricing are usually included in the Statement Of Work in the form of a Cost Estimate, along with standard regulatory and governance terms and conditions.

### SSL
Secure Sockets Layer, encryption for web communications. Before SSL, the Internet had little commercial use, because with HTTP the data is transferred through multiple service providers, any of whom can intercept and view the traffic. The data could be routed through any number of foreign countries between the server and the browser. Without SSL, all data transferred is like messages on post cards - the postman can read them. SSL encrypts the data so that only the sender and recipient can access it, regardless of where the data goes along the route.

SSL requires an SSL Certificate (“cert”) on the server end. Almost all SSL certs are equivalent technologically, but depending on brand you pay between $30 for the redneck version to $1500 for the champagne-and-caviar “We’re a bank” version.

### Staging
Staging is the process of putting a website, or modified version of an existing website, on an alternate staging server for review before taking it live.

### Target Market
The group of individuals to which a particular product, service or platform is aimed and marketed. These groups are usually defined by a combination of demographic, psychographic and socio-economic factors. Related to T-Cut.

### T-Cut
The idealised person to which a particular product, service or platform is aimed and marketed. While Target Market defines the group that falls within a range of demographic, psychographic and socio-economic factors - the T-cut describes one single idealised individual. Related to Target Market.

### Template
A document or web page which can have content added to it. HTML templates are web pages provided by designers, with sample content (e.g. photo galleries) which need to be replaced by the real content of the client to make the site functional. Our developers convert these to Django templates, which can substitute the real content - e.g. Hi {{name}} becomes Hi Gustav.

### Twitter
From Wikipedia:
Twitter is a social networking and microblogging service, owned and operated by Twitter Inc., that enables its users to send and read other user's messages calledtweets. Tweets are text-based posts of up to 140 characters displayed on the author's profile page. Tweets are publicly visible by default, however senders can restrict message delivery to their friends list. Users may subscribe to other author tweets—this is known as following and subscribers are known as followers. As of late 2009, users can follow lists of authors instead of following individual authors.[7][8] All users can send and receive tweets via the Twitter website, compatible external applications (such as, for smartphones), or by Short Message Service (SMS) available in certain countries.[9] While the service is free, accessing it through SMS may incur phone service provider fees. Since its creation in 2006 by Jack Dorsey, Twitter has gained notability and popularity worldwide and currently has more than 100 million users worldwide.

For more info go here or sign up at http://twitter.com and get involved to truly understand.

### UAT
User Acceptance Testing - a process of testing a website before launch, to make sure it is usable and does what it is required to do. Results in approval for launch. It’s a part of the QA process, but QA also includes testing functionality the user can’t readily see.

### URL (Uniform Resource Locater)
The unique address of a web page or image or other piece of content on the Web. Looks like this: http://www.praekelt.com/images/logo_praekelt.gif
 
### Unique browser (UB)
From wikipedia
According to IFABC Global Web Standards, a unique browser (UB) is "An IP address plus a further identifier. Sites may use User Agent, Cookie and/or Registration ID."
For more info go here.
While this metric can not determine the number of users visiting a platform with complete accuracy it gives an industry accepted measure of the number of people visiting a site, and is thus a measure of the site’s popularity.

### User Generated Content (UGC)
Also known as Consumer Generated Media (CGM) or User Created Content (UCC) this refers to all content on a digital platform created by users of the platform - from comments to blogs and image or video uploads. A User Generated Content campaign refers to a campaign in which the call to action is to get the audience to upload content around a specific theme. These campaigns are notoriously difficult to run as the number of consumers of content on the Internet far exceeds the number of creators of content on the Internet.

### User Experience (UX) / User Interface
It is said that if a User Experience engineer designed a computer game interface, it would consist of one button: “Rescue Princess”. User Experience is about design principles behind sites that look beautiful and are a joy to use.

### USSD/Star menu
Unstructured Supplementary Service Data is a capability of all GSM phones. It is generally associated with real-time or instant messaging type phone services. There is no store-and-forward capability, such as is typical of other short-message protocols (in other words, an SMSC is not present in the processing path). Response times for interactive USSD-based services are generally quicker than those used for SMS. At Praekelt, USSD projects are built using Vumi, our real-time messaging platform.

In Layman’s terms, USSD is an interactive text menu system which can be used on any GSM phone. A user dials a number such as *120* and is then presented with a series of text screens to which they can respond by replying with a number that corresponds to a multiple choice question or by entering free form text. This menu system times out after a certain amount of time which varies depending on the MNO but is usually approximately 180 seconds. All prepaid users use USSD to manage their account by doing things such as top up airtime but USSD is not commercially available in all countries. Additionally USSD usage is charged per second and not per interaction and so has a major advantage to SMS when requiring multiple inputs from users, for example in registering for a service.

### USP (Unique selling proposition)
From wikipedia:
is a marketing concept that was first proposed as a theory to explain a pattern among successful advertising campaigns of the early 1940s. It states that such campaigns made unique propositions to the customer and that this convinced them to switch brands. The term was invented by Rosser Reeves of Ted Bates & Company. Today the term is used in other fields or just casually to refer to any aspect of an object that differentiates it from similar objects.

### Video (MPEG4, etc.)
Pretty moving pictures. 
From wikipedia:
Video is the technology of electronically capturing, recording, processing, storing, transmitting, and reconstructing a sequence of still images representing scenes in motion.
The video format (eg its suffix) refers to the Video codec used in the creation of the video.

### Video codec
Video codecs refer to the way that the video is decoded by your computer from all the matrix like 1’s and 0’s into pretty moving pictures. 
From wikipedia:
A video codec is a device or software that enables video compression and/or decompression for digital video. 
For a list of codecs go here.

### Visits
A web or mobi platform monitoring metric that refers to the total number of times the platform has been visited within a specific time frame. Visits does not equal unique users of the platform.

### Viral growth/Viral campaign
The ultimate in marketing success, something “goes viral” when it’s just so entertaining or compelling that people send it to each other at a rapid rate, doing the marketers’ work for them. One can try to stimulate viral growth by making it very easy for people to share your content with each other with “Share”, “Like”, “Send to a friend” but at the end of the day, content is very important - it turns out there is limited demand for wallpaper images depicting household cleaning products.

### VoIP
Voice over IP is Internet telephony, sending voice and even video over the Internet instead of regular phone lines. VoIP is very flexible and low cost, but call quality depends on the bandwidth and quality of the connections to and within the Internet. Skype is a well known VoIP system which is not compatible with any other VoIP systems. SIP is a standard used by most other VoIP systems, that lets you use various different phones or software programs to connect.

### Vumi
Praekelt Foundation’s super-scalable open source messaging engine - delivering SMS, Star Menu and Chat messaging that can scale across millions of subscribers for high volume traffic requirements. Visit the [site](http://vumi.org/). 

### Web Services
Web Services are when one server talks to another server over the web. It’s similar to a browser connecting to a server, but there is no user experience - images or layout, just data transferred. Examples include a web site connecting to an SMS provider to send an SMS, or the links between systems on separate servers that operate together to provide one function.

### WWW
The World Wide Web, consisting of web sites, web pages, images and other content, all addressed by URLs. Not the whole Internet, which includes FTP and email and VoIP and other things - but the major part of it.

### Widget
Widgets are mini-applications that can be distributed to a number of platforms. These mini-applications can have various levels of functionality and interactivity and can be tailor made to suit almost any need. For widgets to be more than just toys and add value to the readers who will use them, these widgets will link to the internet in order to update content and interact with the community of widget users.

### Wireframe
A wireframe is a skeleton version of a user interface that depicts navigational concepts and content. It acts like a functional prototype of the final product without final design, content or graphics. Wireframes are created by our  user experience team for all digital user interfaces that will be created during the project.

Wireframes allow for the development of variations of a layout to maintain consistency throughout the user interface. This is an important part of the initial development stage because it creates user expectations and helps develop familiarity with the system.

Creating a set of wireframes for a project also acts as a way to communicate with clients and stakeholders such as content creators, software engineers, and developers. Over the course of a project the wireframing exercise functions as a stable base on which to consider changes, diverse user paths, and new requirements. The information architect and information designer typically use the wireframes as a meeting of the minds and as solid working documents on which to establish the language, content, and structure of interactions users will have with a given site or project.

The creation of wireframes also helps to define the positioning of global and secondary levels of navigation in a prominent and intuitive position, as well as providing an area for utilities such as helpful information and search facilities. Generally, it is after creating wireframes that branding is applied to the site to communicate the identity and personality of the site.

Wireframes can range from simple structural drawings of the site to a high-fidelity simulation of the navigation, which has movements, functional links and complex interactions. For simple drawings, paper prototyping is the most common technique, but it's becoming increasingly common to use software for more complex projects.[1]. 


### WoW
Ways of Working: A Praekelt document to inform new clients or partners about our processes.

### WURFL
A commercial service which tells us the capabilities of a mobile phone web browser - e.g. screen size, whether it can do video, javascript, etc. Typical sites need a $40/month subscription to use it.

### XML
From Wikipedia:
Extensible Markup Language (XML) is a set of rules for encoding documents in machine-readable form. Although the design of XML focuses on documents, it is widely used for the representation of arbitrary data structures, for example in web services. Many application programming interfaces (APIs) have been developed that software developers use to process XML data.
For more info go here.

### Zero Rated
Zero rated services are services where users don’t incur any cost while using the service. An example of this is Vodafone Live! This service is only available for Vodacom users and here users can surf this portal for free.

Another great resource - 20 things Learned about Browsers and the Web

